Yaml Inheritance Guide (#647)
space-wizards/docs: src/en/ss14-by-example/yaml-inheritance-guide.md

> # YAML Inheritance Guide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# YAML Inheritance Guide

This guide will teach you how inheritance works in YAML prototypes. Inheritance allows "child" prototypes to inherit data from "parent" prototypes, making it easy to copy or change behaviors without needing to type out all data for every single prototype.

```

Reviewer: Just a quick summary setting expectations for what the doc will contain.

### Inheritance Rules

> There are different ways DataFields get merged or overwritten when inheriting from another prototype in YAML and they can be a little confusing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are different ways DataFields get merged or overwritten when inheriting from another prototype in YAML, and they can be a little confusing.
```

Let's look at a few examples:
```yml
# Define a few tags for testing purposes.
# Normally these should be in tags.yml.
- type: Tag
  id: TagA1

- type: Tag
  id: TagA2

- type: Tag
  id: TagB

- type: entity
  abstract: true
  id: ParentA
  components:
  - type: Tag
    tags:
    - TagA1
    - TagA2

>   - type: MeleeWeapon # turn the entity into a weapon

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - type: MeleeWeapon # This component allows the entity to function as a weapon.
```

    damage:
      types:
        Heat: 10

- type: entity
  abstract: true
  id: ParentB
  components:
  - type: Tag
    tags:
    - TagB

>   - type: PointLight # make it glow

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - type: PointLight # This component makes the entity glow.
```

    color: green
    energy: 10

- type: entity
  abstract: true
  id: ParentC
  components:
  - type: Sprite

>     sprite: Objects/Fun/Plushies/hampter.rsi # change the sprite folder only, but not the state

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    sprite: Objects/Fun/Plushies/hampter.rsi # Change the sprite folder only, but not the state.
```

# A simple item with a lizard sprite.

> # A sprite needs both the 'sprite' datafield, which contains the path to the rsi folder the image file is in,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# A sprite needs both the 'sprite' datafield, which contains the path to the RSI folder the image file is in, and the 'state' datafield which is the name of the .png file itself.
```

> # and the 'state' datafield which is the name of the .png file itself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```
Should this be in a new line?

- type: entity

>   parent: BaseItem # This parent has a bunch of components giving it physics, a fixture and allowing us to pick it up..

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  parent: BaseItem # This parent has a bunch of components giving it physics and a fixture, allowing us to pick it up.
```

  id: TestItem1
  name: test item 1
  description: lizard
  components:
  - type: Sprite
    sprite: Objects/Fun/Plushies/lizard.rsi

>     state: icon # this state name is the same for all basic plushie sprites

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    state: icon # This state name is the same for all basic plushie sprites.
```

> # The lizard sprite rsi is inherited first from TestItem1.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# The lizard sprite RSI is inherited first from TestItem1.
```

> # The rsi is not overwritten by the hampter because it already exists in the first parent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# The RSI is not overwritten by the hampter because it already exists in the first parent.
```

# So the resulting entity has a lizard sprite.
- type: entity
  parent: [ TestItem1, ParentC ]
  id: TestItem2
  name: test item 2
  description: lizard

> # If we inherit in this order the rsi path will be taken from ParentC first.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# If we inherit in this order the RSIpath will be taken from ParentC first.
```

> # TestItem1 will then add the state Datafield, but not overwrite the rsi.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# TestItem1 will then add the state Datafield, but not overwrite the RSI.
```

# The result will be a hampter.
- type: entity
  parent: [ ParentC, TestItem1 ]
  id: TestItem3
  name: test item 3
  description: hampter

> # This time we manually overwrite the inherited rsi.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# This time we manually overwrite the inherited RSI.
```

# The inherited state remains unchanged.
# The result will be another hampter.
- type: entity
  parent: TestItem1
  id: TestItem4
  name: test item 4
  description: hampter
  components:
  - type: Sprite
    sprite: Objects/Fun/Plushies/hampter.rsi

# This item will inherit the tags from ParentA, but not from ParentB.
# So it will have TagA1 and TagA2.
# The item will have both the PointLightComponent and the MeleeWeaponComponent and the corresponding DataFields set in the parents.
- type: entity
  parent: [ TestItem1, ParentA, ParentB ]
  id: TestItem5
  name: test item 5
  description: lizard

# To fix this and make the entity have all 3 tags we have to redefine the list manually.
- type: entity
  parent: [ TestItem1, ParentA, ParentB ]
  id: TestItem6
  name: test item 6
  description: lizard
  components:
  - type: Tag
    tags: # this overwrites the inherited list
    - TagA1
    - TagA2
    - TagB
```
  

> To summarize the inheritance rules:

Reviewer: I would put this section before the yaml example. That way you prime the reader for what they will see in the example, rather than show a lot of yaml without it being clear what they should be looking for. 

You do this for the next sections and I think they read smoother as a result.

Reviewer 3: In a similar vein, I think it would be more clear by having these rules come with their own examples instead of a list of rules followed by a list of examples.

  1. A prototype can have one or multiple parents.

>   2. A DataField that is not set in YAML gets its default value from its C# definition. In C# all variables have a default value if not specified otherwise, for example `public bool SomeVariable;` will always be `false` (in other programming languages you may get random bits).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  2. A DataField that is not set in YAML gets its default value from its C# definition. In C#, all variables have a default value if not specified otherwise; for example, `public bool SomeVariable` will always be `false` (in other programming languages, you may get random bits).
```

  3. If you inherit from multiple parents, then components and their DataFields are inherited individually.

>   4. The order of inheritance matters: Each DataField will be taken from the first parent that has it set in YAML.

Reviewer 3: I think this line could pop better by being bold.
```suggestion
  4. **The order of inheritance matters**: Each DataField will be taken from the first parent that has it set in YAML.
```

  5. You can overwrite inherited DataFields by reassigning a new value in the child.

>   6. If a DataField is overwritten, then the whole instance of the variable is reassigned. This means data types like lists (for example for tags) won't get merged, but replaced. However, you can change this behaviour for individual DataFields using the `AlwasPushInheritance`attribute (see further below for a detailed explanation).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  6. If a DataField is overwritten, then the whole instance of the variable is reassigned. This means data types like lists (for example, tags) won't be merged; they'll be replaced. However, you can change this behaviour for individual DataFields using the `AlwasPushInheritance` attribute (see further below for a detailed explanation).
```

>   7. You cannot remove components that are inherited from a parent. You will have to make another abstract parent without that component instead to avoid copy pasting everything. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  7. You cannot remove components that are inherited from a parent. You will have to make another abstract parent without that component instead to avoid copy-pasting everything. 
```

```admonish warning
Common Mistake:

> Rule 6 often gets overlooked for tags. If you add a new tag to an EntityPrototype make sure that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Rule 6 often gets overlooked for tags. If you add a new tag to an EntityPrototype make sure that:
```

- the new list of tags for that entity contains all tags that were previously inherited.
- any child prototypes that have their own tags explicitly list the new tag as well.
```

### Abstract Prototypes

> If you got a base prototype that should not a fully functioning prototype on its own, but used for inheritance, then make sure to mark it as `abstract`. This will make sure it cannot be spawned by any means, it will be hidden from the F5 spawn menu, and will be ignored by integration tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have a base prototype that should not be a fully functioning prototype on its own, but is used for inheritance, then make sure to mark it as `abstract`. This will ensure it cannot be spawned by any means; it will be hidden from the F5 spawn menu and ignored by integration tests.
```

Reviewer: I would add "only" to `but is only used for inheritance`. Afaik there is no reason to make something abstract if not for inheritance.

Example:
```yml
# A simplified plushie that inherits from BaseItem and has incomplete SpriteComponent DataFields.
- type: entity

>   abstract: true # should not be spawned since this prototype is incomplete

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  abstract: true # Should not be spawned since this prototype is incomplete.
```

  parent: BaseItem
  id: BasePlushie
  components:
  - type: Sprite

>     state: icon # all plushie sprites have the same state name

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    state: icon # All plushie sprites have the same state name.
```

>   - type: EmitSoundOnUse # make it squeak when used

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - type: EmitSoundOnUse # Makes the plushie squeak when used.
```

    sound:
      collection: ToySqueak

# A plushie that can be spawned in the game.
- type: entity
  parent: BasePlushie
  id: PlushieBee
  name: bee plushie
  components:
  - type: Sprite

>     state: plushie_h # add a state (the sprite path is inherited from BasePlushie)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    state: plushie_h # Adds a state (the sprite path is inherited from BasePlushie).
```

Reviewer 3: In this example `BasePlushie` is the one that has a state. This prototype use a filepath.

# And another one.
- type: entity
  parent: BasePlushie
  id: PlushieLizard # Weh!
  name: lizard plushie
  components:
  - type: Sprite
    state: plushie_lizard
```

If a prototype that is a fully functioning entity on its own should only be hidden from the F5 spawn menu, but can still be spawned through other means in-game, then you should be using The `HideSpawnMenu` category.
Examples are mind entities, objectives, or visual effects like this one used for flashbangs:
```yml
- type: entity
  id: GrenadeFlashEffect
  categories: [ HideSpawnMenu ]
  components:
  - type: PointLight
    enabled: true
    radius: 5
    energy: 8
    netsync: false
  - type: LightFade
    duration: 0.5
  - type: TimedDespawn
    lifetime: 0.5
```
This is a simple pointlight that quickly disappears and deletes itself. We use `categories: [HideSpawnMenu]` to make sure it does not show up in the spawn menu, but it can still be spawned through code using the `Spawn(protoId, coords)` method or similar.
This will also exclude it from several integration tests, which may otherwise fail for such an entity.

> ### Making a prototype inheritable

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Making a Prototype Inheritable
```

> The above examples were all for `EntityPrototype`s, but they work the same for any other type of prototype. You can define your own prototype in C# and make it store DataFields. To make it inheritable in YAML you will have to implement the `IInheritingPrototype` interface. This requires a  DataField for the parents and a bool for being abstract.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The above examples were all for `EntityPrototype`s, but they work the same for any other type of prototype. You can define your own prototype in C# and make it store DataFields. To make it inheritable in YAML, you will have to implement the `IInheritingPrototype` interface. This requires a DataField for the parents and a bool for being abstract.
```

Reviewer: I would also make a short mention of why you would even define your own prototype to begin with (e.g. mention how prototypes are useful as presets).

Reviewer: `This requires a DataField for the parents and a bool for being abstract.` ->
`This requires a DataField for the ID and parents, and a bool for being abstract.`

    /// <inheritdoc/>
    [NeverPushInheritance]
    [AbstractDataField]
    public bool Abstract { get; private set; }

    /// <summary>
    /// A string you can set in YAML.
    /// </summary>
    [DataField]
    public string Field1 = "Field1 default value";

    /// <summary>
    /// And a second one.
    /// </summary>
    [DataField]
    public string Field2 = "Field2 default value";

    /// <summary>
    /// A datafield with different inheritance behaviour.
    /// This List will be merged instead of overwritten.
    /// </summary>
    [DataField, AlwaysPushInheritance]
    public List<string> AlwaysInheritedField = new();

    /// <summary>
    /// A datafield with different inheritance behaviour.
    /// This one will never get inherited.
    /// </summary>
    [DataField]
    public string NeverInheridedField = "default value";
}
```

```yml
- type: inheritanceTest
  id: Parent1
  field1: foo

- type: inheritanceTest
  id: Parent2
  field2: bar

- type: inheritanceTest
  parent: [ Parent1, Parent2 ]
  id: Child
  # This will inherit both field1 being foo, and field2 being bar.
```

### AlwaysPushInheritance, NeverPushInheritance

> These two attributes can change the inheritance behaviour for a specific DataField. This works both for DataFields inside Components and inside custom Prototypes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These two attributes can change the inheritance behaviour for a specific DataField. This works both for DataFields inside Components and inside custom Prototypes. You can find if a DataField has these attributes by looking at it in the C# code.
```

I'd move this comment up here instead of the snippet at the bottom.

  id: Parent1
  alwaysInheritedField:
  - foo

- type: inheritanceTest
  id: Parent2
  alwaysInheritedField:
  - bar

- type: inheritanceTest
  parent: [ Parent1, Parent2 ]
  id: Child
  alwaysInheritedField:
  - weh
```
The `Child` prototype will have a `AlwaysInheritedField` DataField with a list containing all three strings `foo`, `bar` and `weh`. 
This comes at the downside of not being able to remove any entries from that list in any inheritors. Ideally in the future we will add a more powerful YAML syntax to allow us to select the inheritance behaviour on a case by case basis (see some discussion [here](https://github.com/space-wizards/RobustToolbox/issues/5141), [here](https://github.com/space-wizards/space-station-14/issues/43326) and [here](https://forum.spacestation14.com/t/move-tags-to-rt-add-proper-entity-prototype-syntax/22759)).
This also works recursively for any custom `DataDefinition`s, see for example the `Solution` DataField in the `SolutionComponent`.

`NeverPushInheritance` will make a DataField not get inherited at all.
```yml
- type: inheritanceTest
  id: Parent
  neverInheridedField: weh

- type: inheritanceTest
  parent: Parent
  id: Child

>   # neverInheritedField will be the C# default "default value" again

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  # neverInheritedField will be the C# default "default value" again.
```
